# Final Project | Comparing the cost of major US universities vs the cost of living in major US cities
## Purpose
The purpose of my project was to look at the average debt from major US universities and compare it to the cost of living in major US cities. Most universities will gladly tell you what the tuition is and how to apply for finacial aid but they don't tell you how much debt the average student gains along with their degree. I wanted do a comparison with the cost of living in major US cities since after many students graduate, they hope to go out into the world and find a job to pay for their education, but soon are hit with the reality of high rents and not very high incomes.
The purpose of this tool is to help make that information accessible. I can say from the experience of being a first generation college student from a small city, it can be hard to navigate on your own. I wanted to make a tool that made it easy to see the potential costs and use it for potential college students to plan and make decisions.
## Gathering the data
This was by far my favorite part of the project. To start with I scraped Times Higer Education to get a list of top universities and read it into a pandas dataframe. I chose this website because it was the easiest to scrape the data from and the rankings weren't important for the project, I just needed a list of universities. Then I imported a CSV from the College Scorecard website with all the Universities and the IDs I would need to later make API calls from their website. College Scorecard is a government tool for consumers to compare cost and value of higher education institutes in case you didn't know. With some data manipulation, I was able to combine these two dataframes and create the json file I would use to make my map and also make an API call to College Scorecard to get the student debt information.
For getting the city portion, I found a json file with 1000 major US cities and their latitude and longitude on Github Gist. Why reinvent the wheel when you can just download it from the internet? So that is what I did cut it off at 100 because 1000 seemed a bit much. Special shout out to GitHub user Miserlou for saving me a ton of time.
After importing the data into a panda's dataframe I still needed more information such as income and rent. To get this I scraped City-Data.com, using the city and state to create URLs and looping through them to grab the median gross rent and the median per capita income. This was a bit of a challenge and involved quite a few steps (see jupyter notebook City_Data_Scrape), but compared to issues I would late encounter, it was a cake walk.
## Putting it all together
Next I needed to create geojson data to make my map creation easier. I created functions to take the dataframes I gathered and convert that data to geojson. Special shoutout to Geoff Boeing's blog for helping me through this. Super interesting if you are into data analysis for urban planning at all. Then using Leaflet and Mapbox I create a basic US map with different markers for cities and others for universities. 
I did some basic html, css and javascript to create search boxes where you can type in the name of the university to display the average monthly loan payments, average debt for a student who's family makes less than 30,000 a year, average debt for a student who's family makes between 30,000 and 75,000 a year and average debt for student's who's family make over 75,000 a year. Similarly, with the cities it displays the Median Monthly Income, Median Monthly Rent, City and State.
This provides an easy way to see the data and compare the costs. You can look at different universities and different cities and get an idea of what you're in store for financially.
## Struggles and Failures with Flask
When I started this project I had grand plans, but slowly I realized I would have to scale back. Originally I had built a flask app and had planned to have dropdowns to select the city and school the create graphs based on the financial data. I find Flask and SqlAlchemy to be frustrating to put it politely. I spent more hours than I care to admit battling with it. I struggled to get my data into a database, my dropdowns would work sometimes and then I'd open it the next day and only one would work, and plenty of other issues that I'm sure I've just blocked out of my memory. I do think this is obtainable, but I need much more time than I currently have available to tinker with it. 
## Conclusions & Final Thoughts
It was really interesting to see the difference between the debt for different debt levels depending on income. There were quite a few where the middle group, income greater than 30,000 and less than 75,000 had higher than either of the other groups. There are many cases where rent and student debt account for over half the median monthly income, not leaving much to live off of. 
There is so much more I would love to do with this project. I really enjoyed finding the data and manipulating it in pandas. I also really enjoy maps and creating them, I would love to have had more time to create  more. Besides my above mentioned struggles, I still find javascript difficult and something I would need to spend more time with. Working on a project alone was both the best and the worst. I loved having complete control over the direction of the project and only have to worry about my own hectic schedule. However, I didn't have anyone to help me troubleshoot or bounce ideas off of. Despite my many struggles, I have a finished project and am still employed, married and sane. I'd call it a win.

